Naomi BreitenfeldENGL 361: Asian American Women’s Writing

**Abstract**

A play on words in its own way, *A Tale for the Time Being* is
supposedly a tale of Jiko the 100+ years old Buddhist nun written by Nao
in the past to commemorate Jiko’s death. It is also a tale for the “time
being,” a person who experiences the passing of time and happens to find
Nao’s journal in the present. Nao writes her journal in the present
tense, which is later found by Ruth, an American writer living on the
other side of the Pacific and a few years into the future. This
heterodiegetic narration introduces the cross-generational concept of
time and being.\*\*Spatial and conceptual ideas of time, generational
influence, and the effects of trauma in both realms of time and familial
generations are employed to further these concepts. The layers of each
facet of the novel slowly build up before washing the reader away at
their peak climaxes. Ruth Ozeki inextricably links the two main
characters, Nao and Ruth, and the reader as well, through the creation
of this chaotic community abstractedly linked by time and trauma. The
trauma of the 2011 tsunami briefly takes hold, but is dissipated by the
discovery of Nao’s flotsam journal being in the sea before that tragedy.
Yet trauma persists: in Jiko’s past of living in a war torn nation and
in Nao’s present where suicide is an attractive outlet for her father
and her. In Ruth’s world, the temporal separation is forgotten and time
collides with trauma as her own struggles with identity and being arise.
This leads the reader to ask: at the intersection of time and trauma,
when and how is Nao’s identity influenced by the various forms and
occurrences of trauma? Nao near constantly ruminates upon suicide, but
ultimately never follows through after learning of the prevalence of
trauma in her family which shapes her identity. At its simplest,
identity is inextricable from the state of being itself. Nao’s identity,
or rather Nao’s current perception of being, in this moment is wholly
influenced by the various intersections of time and trauma before,
during, and even after Nao’s life.

\
 **Introduction**

One of several underlying motifs of Ozeki’s *A Tale for the Time Being*
is the teachings of Zen Buddhist Master Dogen. This motif permeates the
tales of both Ruth and Naoko (Nao), crossing time and space to dispel
trauma by making it unavoidable to avoid. This odd way of acceptance and
assimilation into one’s identity is easily summed by this brief thought
on Zazen meditation from the Master himself:

“Think not thinking.

How do you think not-thinking?

Nonthinking. This is the essential art of zazen” (qtd. Ozeki 183).

This round-about logic applies to time and trauma as well. Trauma can
occur before, during, and after our lifetimes, but it always changes our
perception of being and our identities --whether we are aware of it or
not. Just as zazen meditation is the practice of thinking about not
thinking in order to nonthink (hold an empty mind), the intersections of
time and trauma reflect upon “being” and “non-being,” identity and
non-identity. It is these intersections of time and trauma, before,
during, and after Nao’s life that permeate Nao’s identity and
consequently her very being. Naoko’s identity is carved out not just by
her actions and perceptions, but by those of Ruth, and even the reader.

This occurrence of time and trauma is not isolated simply to the realm
of fiction, or literature. Highlighted in para-text in *A Tale for the
Time Being*, Marcel Proust wrote in *Le temps retrouvé* that “The
writer’s work is merely a kind of optical instrument, which he offers to
the reader to permit him to discern… in his own self of what the book
says is the proof of its truth” (qtd. Ozeki 109). The identities we as
readers see and come to relate with are relatable because they mirror
identities that we as people come in contact with in “real” life.
Transgenerational trauma is something that every reader can, to an
extent, relate to in literature because of this mirroring of life
identities. In order to fully discuss the implications of time and
trauma in the realization of Nao’s identity however, we must first
define what is identity and what is being. While the two terms are very
closely related, the difference arises from the verb form of the root
“be” in “being” and the singular noun state of the word “identity.”

The idea of identity itself is a very complicated and vast topic. A
contented definition in both fields of science and liberal arts, what
identity denotes varies from classic definitions in fields from
psychology to philosophy. The most commonly accepted definition of
identity in psychology is Erik Erikson’s definition of identity as the
point of view of an individual weathered by internal and external
conflicts, where each crisis reshapes or at the very least alters the
perceived point of view (Sokol 2). In philosophy, discussions of
identity and being overlap with increasing complexity and little
clarification. It is possible to parse out however, that the concept of
“being,” as a verb, is the act of actively existing --actively making
conscious decisions that bring one through the crisis of life and
ultimately aid in shaping “identity” (Glover 72, 101). In this way
“identity” is tied to “being:” the act of being influences the identity
– at their simplest they are one and the same. Therefore for the purpose
of the analysis of the formation of Naoko’s identity due to
time-transcending trauma, unless otherwise noted, “identity” and “being”
will refer to this process and the end result of identity formation and
existence.

Time is one continuous, mobius strip[\^1\^](\#sdfootnote1sym) that Ozeki
certainly plays with throughout her novel, therefore to simplify my
analysis, I have broken down Ozeki’s novel into three categories of
traumatic events: the influence of past trauma in present identities,
trauma’s influence on Nao’s identity in the present and past,, and
finally, traumatic identities in the past influencing the possibility of
future trauma. The format of analysis will be further divided into three
parts: explication of relevant text or supporting real world example,
correlation of time and trauma to the shaping of Naoko’s identity, and
finally a realization of this literary lens.

\
 **The Influence of Past Trauma in Present Identities**

“They were the voices of our ancestors,” said the mayor of a town,
destroyed by a wave. “They were speaking to us across time, but we
didn’t listen” (Ozeki 112).

In the aftermath of the 2011 nuclear meltdown, the mayor speaking above,
retrospectively admits that the people’s ignorance of past traumatic
events like the terrible flash-flooding and tsunami contributed to their
oversight of the extent of damage and capacity of nature to literally
wash away mankind. Had the people of that town paid attention to the 600
year-old stone markers that said “do not build below this mark, the
tsunamis will wash it all away,” then the resulting tsunami from the
earthquake may not have been so damaging to communities across Japan. In
this lack of recognition of past trauma – previous tsunamis – the
present identities of the Japanese people can be described anywhere
between and related from“missing” to “homeless.” This is but one general
instance of past traumatic events heavily influencing the way trauma is
perceived in the relative present of Nao’s generation. In effect, Nao’s
generational identity has been altered.

These events of a generation (or life-time) inevitably become a part of
the identities of the people (like Nao) living during these incidences –
they determine a part of Nao’s identity as a member and by the actions
of her generation. But even more importantly, these prior events impact
Nao’s way of thinking and life in ways that she perceive to be normal to
her, but stand out to the older generations in which these changes were
made. Modern Japanese are sometimes described by the Japanese term
“heiwaboke,” which roughly translates into “peace senility” (Jisho.org
“heiwaboke”).

Jiko herself, Nao’s great-grandmother, speaks of the concept of
heiwaboke in the younger generation of Japanese people (Nao’s generation
in particular). Jiko, who lived through World War II explains this idea
very well to Nao: “She says we think Japan is a peaceful nation, because
we were born after the war ended and peace is all we can remember, and
we like it that way, but actually our whole lives are shaped by the war
and past and we should understand that” (Ozeki 180). Even with Jiko’s
explanation, Nao is still unsure as to what it means to be “heiwaboke.”
This arises from Nao’s generation’s complete removal from the events of
World War II by merit of being born after the war ended and global
politics settled.

Without this understanding of what it is like to live in a war-torn
nation or during a war era and not understanding how daily life has
changed in response to post-war reforms, Nao and her generation cannot
avoid having a part of their identities labeled or described as
heiwaboke. The events that transpired before her birth changed Japan’s
approach to many things in the future that Nao grew up in. As a result
of this, Nao’s identity, the molding out of her identity, and her
reactions to trauma in her life is forever framed and made different
from that of say, Jiko’s war-acquainted and Zen Buddhist identity.

\
 **Trauma’s influence on Nao’s Identity in the Present and Past**

There is a very interesting concept of time that refers to what is
supposedly happening right now, in this very moment that we call the
“present”. Anything can happen in this present as it never-endingly
passes us by and brings to us new and varied levels of trauma.These
overtly average occurrences of trauma experienced in the present are not
realized until later in the future.

For a moment, I must digress to detail: trauma in our everyday lives is
often not something that we normally notice --what we do notice as
trauma are large instances of negative or positive events. In this form,
“trauma” takes on less of a negative connotation in its referencing any
event that causes, instigates, or require change. Take for instance the
importance of trauma in the field of ecology and evolution: ecosystems
do not change unless they experience trauma. This ecological trauma is
(geologically speaking) quickly stabilized in the present and becomes
apparent in the existing, consequential changes in the future (be it a
recovered forest after volcanic eruption or a newly evolved amphibian
adaptation). In *A Tale for the Time Being*, Oliver touches upon this
idea through his actions: “ He planted groves of ancient natives
--metasequoia, giant sequoia, coast redwoods, *Juglans, Ulmus,*and
gingko --species that had been indigenous to the area during the Eocene
Thermal Maximum, some 55 million years ago” (Ozeki 60). As an
environmental artist, Oliver must pay attention to the type of trauma
that he will either inflict or have to have to consider in his
eco-projects. In this instance, Oliver is influenced in the present to
combat the rising global temperatures (long occurring traumatic event)
in which the future will culminate into an entirely different
environment for the area, by the past existence of certain types of
trees that were once indigenous. In a similar way, Naoko discerns this
conundrum of present, past, and future through a small passage she
writes in her diary.

Nao’s writes her story in a diary format of first-person present tense
which makes clear the need to discuss how present trauma comes to
influence consequently occurring, present events and the future.
Therefore in analyzing how trauma in the present impacts the future, we
must first take in consideration the latent convoluted nature of the
particular point in time which we, as mentioned prior, perceive to be
the present. Nao herself, explains this convoluted nature in a
reflection upon her childhood: “No matter how fast you write, you’re
always stuck in the *then* and you can never catch up to what’s
happening *now*, which means that *now* is pretty much doomed to
extinction” (Ozeki 96-96). Nao reflects upon this in attempts to
solidify her Japanese-American identity as a child, introspectively
contemplating how she associated the word “now” with “Nao,” the shorter
version of her name, Naoko, due to the phonetic congruence. Nao
describes the kotodama[\^2\^](\#sdfootnote2sym) of “now” as a slippery
fish that is devouring a small “Nao” fish. This description is essential
to allowing her prior thoughts on the present to crest into completion.
The two fish are metaphors of Nao’s inability to find her identity in
the present of her childhood. As the lives of children are focused on
growth and development, in the transgenerational trauma frame of
analysis, Nao’s childhood lack of identity is due to the complacent
nature of childhood: there are simply no traumas for which her existence
to adapt to, or to become a more definitive form of identity.

Nao as a child cannot construct an identity due to a lack of trauma akin
to an ecological disturbance that challenges the environment/organisms
(Nao’s juvenile identity) to the point of change (identity development).
We must remember that what we consider to be the “present,” is an exact
and ever fading moment of what is occurs at the most finite unit of time
and operates under the influences of it’s own trauma as it continually
becomes the past. Obviously, this in itself creates a complex labyrinth
of the way we must contextualize time as each moment, each “present”
existence is already, as Nao said, “extinct” before you even realize it
occurred.

Time is instantaneous, trackable, and predictable, but this
instantaneousness cannot exist beyond the very instance of its birth.
The moment it exists, it immediately dies; it is no longer of the
present for it has already expired and has become transfixed into that
aforementioned past. Hence, the actual “present” does not, per se,
“exist” in both *A Tale for the Time Being* and in our own lives. This
is why we readers can identify with the almost identity-less Nao as a
child. Nao must play constant catch up to future events now in the past
while trauma becomes embedded in her being and identity as time,
incapable of stopping, must stream forward without her and at the same
time, with her.

\
 **Traumatic Identities in the Past Influencing the Possibility of
Future Traum**a

As hinted in the last section, not only is Nao’s identity altered by the
existence of trauma in the past, present, and future possibility, the
traumatic identities in the past influence the possibility of future
trauma in Nao’s life. Out of the most of her family, Nao is able to draw
the most parallels between her traumatic events and the trauma that
Haruki \#1 faces. It is from Haruki \#1’s tragic identity that Nao is
able to overcome her own traumatic experiences and develop a stronger
being and forge her own identity:

“They were student soldiers and very bright. The military men despised
them. They bullied them and beat them every day…” The word she used was
ijime, and hearing it, suddenly I felt very small. Me and my stupid
classmates. My little pricks and pokes and stabbings. I thought I knew
all about ijime, but it turned out I didn’t know anything about it all.
I felt ashamed, but I wanted to know more” (Ozeki 244).

Nao’s perception of suicide changes in response to Haruki
\#1’s[\^3\^](\#sdfootnote3sym) decision to suicide not to kill others as
he should as a Kamikaze pilot, but to suicide by crashing his plane into
the ocean as an action of pacifism. This past trauma --Haruki \#1’s
thought process and followed through actions-- influence the potential
of trauma occurring in Nao’s life. Nao understands the gravity of Haruki
\#1’s decision and her previous view of suicide as a form of escapism
loses most of its merit. The identity of Haruki \#1 (an educated,
student soldier facing severe ijime[\^4\^](\#sdfootnote4sym) from his
commanding officer) and his suicide (a display of pacifism) in sum serve
as the trauma that ripples through time to impact Nao’s future, shifts
away from suicidal-escapism towards inflective and more positive
thoughts.

Nao’s perceptions of the past are constantly changing due to the
“discovery” of things in the present and the “what-might-be” in the
future that is happening NOW. The more Nao learns of the situations that
her great-uncle, Haruki \#1, went through as a philosopher and pacifist,
her past identity of being “Transfer Student Yasutani” becomes a less
defining part of her identity (Ozeki 98). While the beatings Haruki \#1
suffered through and the bullying she faced in school are both referred
to as ijime, Nao realizes the disparity between each instance. Nao is
further disturbed by Haruki \#1’s use of suicide as pacifism to avoid
causing pain to others instead of the outlet of escaping pain as her
father and she see it as. Learning and discerning these things of her
family’s past jolts Nao in the present to avoid forming a truly suicidal
identity in the future.

\
 **Conclusion**

Ultimately, Naoko’s story is only a story within and alongside the
stories of *A Tale for the Time Being*. The development of Nao’s
identity via the various traumatic events that directly and indirectly
impact her being (as in existence) is but one reflection of the various
mirrors of life that literature offers to the readers. In one aspect,
the formation of identity relies upon the introduction of trauma and how
it is managed by the mind. Nao’s actions and thoughts impact Ruth’s
identity in ways very similar to the past history of trauma in Nao’s
family impacts her identity. This discussion on identity in the scope of
time and trauma are not just limited to the realm of literature. After
all, “A book is like a cemetary upon whose tombs one can no longer read
the effaced names” (qtd. Ozeki 357) --the stories that we read just
might be our own, as Master Dogen wrote in Uji: “Because all moments are
the time being, they are your time being” (qtd. Ozeki 259).

\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
 **Bibliography**

\
 Fearon, James D. "WHAT IS IDENTITY (AS WE NOW USE THE WORD)?."
(1999)*.*

\
 Glover, Jonathan. "I: The philosophy and psychology of personal
identity." (1988).

\
 Jisho. (n.d.). Retrieved May 3, 2015, from
http://jisho.org/search/heiwaboke

\
 Kabesh, Lisa. *Teacher, Detective, Witness, Activist: On Pedagogy and
Social Justice in Asian Canadian Literature*. Diss. 2014.

\
 Ozeki, Ruth L. *A Tale for the Time Being*. Penguin, 2013. Print.

\
 Sokol, Justin T. "Identity development throughout the lifetime: an
examination of Eriksonian theory." *Graduate Journal of Counseling
Psychology* 1.2 (2009): 14.

\
 Van Inwagen, Peter. "Fiction and metaphysics." Philosophy and
Literature 7.1 (1983): 67-77.

\
 Yamashiro, Jane H. "A Triple Parallax: Japanese as a Heterogeneous
Global Ethnic Group." CR: The New Centennial Review Vol. 12, No. 1
(Spring 2012): 189-226. *Project MUSE*. Web. 27 Feb. 2015.
\<https://muse.jhu.edu/\>.

[1](#sdfootnote1anc)^^ An endless loop-shaped surface having only one
side and one boundary

[2](#sdfootnote2anc)^^ Japanese idea of spirits that live within words
and gives them special powers

[3](#sdfootnote3anc)^^ Jiko’s son, Nao’s father’s uncle and namesake

[4](#sdfootnote4anc)^^ Romanization of Japanese for bullying (often
resulting in large bruises and small scars on the arms and legs). In
Haruki \#1’s case, it was basically a beating.

\

